#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Subsidizing agricultural inputs to increase adoption and varietal turnover:
 a two stage pricing design
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
If a product is obtained for free, farmers may be less likely to put in
 the additional effort that is needed for 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Context
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To introduce new agricultural technologies, some level of subsidy is often
 used.
 Private sector often use trail packs, as they realize farmers may be reluctant
 to try out a new product.
 Public actors may think commercial seed are out of reach of poor households
 and want to kick start adoption by providing the initial investment.
 The case for free (or subsidies) inputs also stems from potential externalities.
 For example, it is well established that one of the most effective ways
 to increase technology adoption is through peer learning, and both private
 and public partners may attempt to leverage social learning.
 Furthermore, informal seed systems used by farmers often suffer from decades
 of seed degeneration due to recycling of seed introduced during colonial
 times.
 Injecting new seed varieties (that can be recycled to some extent) can
 be an important strategy to improve the overall seed stock in the informal
 sector.
 For instance, public research organizations often invest in open pollinating
 varieties (OPVs) that can be recycled to some extent without losing yield
 potential.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is often argued that providing something for free leads people to attribute
 less value to it.
 As a result, the good or service remains unused, is resold, or used in
 unintended ways.
\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "HOFFMANN2009607"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 argue that poor people that receive goods for free are subject to an endowment
 effect, which reduces their propensity to resell it.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 Examples include the use of free bednets for fishing or the use of subsidized
 chlorine for cleaning (instead of water purification).
 Charging a price is assumed to increase use through three mechanisms.
 The first is a screening effect, whereby only people who really value the
 product will acquire the product, while does who do not intent to use it
 do not.
 A second is more psychological in nature and conjectures that people are
 prone to sunk cost effects.
 As a result, paying a positive price for it also leads one to appreciate
 it more.
 Finally, prices may also provide a signal for quality.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The intended use of free seed trial packs is to experiment and learn, which
 is expected to result in increased adoption in the future.
 This implies various intermediate outcomes on the impact pathway.
 For instance, in a first step, farmers are assumed to use the seed from
 the seed pack for intended use (as opposed to selling it or even eating
 it).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Q1: is learning lower if seed is provided for free versus if farmers need
 to pay for it.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Q2: if Q1 is Yes, is the reduction in learning due to 1) a screening effect
 or 2) 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Policy relevance: the existence of a substantial sunk cost effect would
 mean that providing seed for free is not an effective strategy.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
While cost sharing may increase effectiveness, it reduces demand.
 This could be an issue when those that are likely to select out are also
 the ones that you are targetting: the benefits of learning may be higher
 for those that are more cash or credit constrained.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The elasticity of adoption with respect to price.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The relationship between prices and subsequent adoption during follow up
 in the next season is a combination of the selection and sunk cost effects.
 We use a randomized two-stage pricing design to isolate the sunk-cost effect
 from the overall effect.
 In areas where we charged a price for trial seed bags (through a BDM),
 we applied a random discount.
 As a result, the actual paid price varied from zero (100 percent discount)
 to the posted price (0 percent discount).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We also include a control group to compare outcomes and characteristics
 in the average farmer population.
 This is useful to investigate selection effects of pricing trial packs.
 Such and analysis is useful for setting the subsidy level, as the public
 planner may want to make sure the subsidy is high enough to enable credit
 constraint farmers to buy the seed, but low enough to discourage farmers
 who do not need the seed to obtain it.
 We could for instance test if farmers who select into seed by paying a
 positive price for it are also those farmers that are using poor quality
 seed (see 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.1"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 page 34-35).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One of the cool things about the experiment is also that you can do some
 simple cost-effectiveness estimates with some simple assumptions,
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Potential problem: we need to make sure enough farmers buy in the BDM, to
 make sure we have enough power in the second stage.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Also include: charging a price versus not is also related to sustainability.
 Discuss that private sector may have different intentions with subsidized
 trial packs than eg government, so the former may be more interested in
 one-off discounts, while the latter may be looking more at longer run agro-inpu
t support programs.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "10.1257/aer.99.2.236"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 further explores how charging for health products versus subsidizing affects
 distribution of benefits within the household.
 Using the case of insecticide treated bed-nets as in 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.1"
literal "false"

\end_inset

, they argue that there may be different reasons why free bednets may be
 used more for protecting children than bednets that need to be paid for.
 they conclude that these findings may have implications for the design
 of programs targeting particular groups at the sub-household level.
 In line with this, we may want to investigate how free pack vs payed seed
 affect decision making within households.
 That is, if the (male) decision maker gets seed for free, does he allow
 more participation from the wife than if he made the decision to buy it?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "10.1257/aer.99.2.236"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 also study an endowment effect, where those who get something for free
 become richer and so are less likely to re-sell.
 Can we remove this endowment effect by offering households that need to
 pay for seed a sum of money that is equal to the cost of the seed?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Note: Large scale free seed supply may affect seed market performance if
 it reduces the likelihood that farmers buy.
 In the long run, this may reduce investment in the sector and as a result
 reduce seed turnover.
 This will especially be the case if farmers resell seed they get for free
 or at a subsidized price.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Fit risk
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Fit risk is an important constraint to improved seed adoption and varietal
 turnover in many low and middle income countries.
 Fit risk emerges if a farmer is not unsure if a particularly new technology
 is suitable to their specific characteristics (eg will it grow on my land,
 will I like the taste of it).
 Fit risk is inherently idiosyncratic in nature.
 As such, little can be learned from social networks and experimenting on
 own plots is necessary.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One way to encourage farmers to experiment with new inputs is to provide
 trial packs.
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "van2018performance"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Secondary contributions: most studies look at experimental trials at research
 stations.
 Even in 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "van2018performance"
literal "false"

\end_inset

, the trails were research-managed farm trials set up on demonstration plots.
 This study will distribute trial packs to randomly sampled farmers and
 provide them with a simple protocol to run mini trials on their own fields.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Behavioural learning - negativity bias
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Farmers not only learn from experimentation, they also learn from peers.
 However, social learning is fraught with biases that may slow down varietal
 turnover and/or adoption.
 Using data from the previous experiment, we design an intervention that
 uses the yield data from the on farm trails to look at effects of how informati
on is presented.
 One of the reasons why fake news exists maybe that extremely negative experienc
es get a much higher weight when people learn 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citep
key "soroka2019cross,trussler2014consumer"
literal "false"

\end_inset

.
 Negativity bias is linked to loss aversion, a cognitive bias that describes
 why the pain of losing is psychologically more than twice as powerful as
 the pleasure of gaining.
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "rozin2001negativity"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 suggested that adverse events seem to be dominant as negative entities
 are more contagious than positive entities..
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
alternative explanations for negativity bias: (https://www.bbc.com/future/article/
20140728-why-is-all-the-news-bad)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
danger reaction; be ready for threats so pay attention to the worst news.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
we see the world rosier than it is, so negative things stand out more or
 become more salient
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
incorrect mental models may mean farmers pay attention to the wrong attributes
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
sunk cost effects - should seed have a price? Here is the narrative: if
 you give seeds for free, farmers will not value them.
 This may also affect learning: if farmers do not have to sink a substantive
 cost for the seed, they will also put less effort in learning from it.
 This is called the sunk cost effect, and it is often used as an argument
 against AIPs.
 An alternative explanation is that farmers that pay for seed are actually
 a different subset, as higher prices skew the composition of buyers towards
 farmers with a real interest in seed and so ready for learn from it.
 A
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Power calculations
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Planing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are two maize growing seasons in the area we are planning to work.
 One is running from march/april to june/July, the other from August/Sept
 to November/December.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Ideally we would distribute trail packs together with baseline data collection
 about one month before planting.
 As such, the best time would be around February 2023.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Risks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What seed should we propose? Should we focus on seed turnover? In that case,
 the relevant comparison would be eg Longe 6 to Longe 5.
 Problems with that is that we will need pretty stringent selection criteria
 (eg farmers need to plan to grow Longe 5 to which they will then compare
 the next generation seed eg Longe 6).
 There are also many risks related to this.
 First, will we have access to Longe 6 to distribute in small packages to
 farmers? But more importantly, in the next season, where we want to measure
 the impact of reducing fit risk via trial packs on future adoption, the
 new seed (Longe 6) needs to be on the market.
 Alternatively, we could focus on adoption more generally, in case we would
 like farmers to compare farmer saved seed to the improved seed variety
 we supply in the form of a trial package.
 In this case, we can decide to select a variety we are certain that is
 widely available such that the supply constrained is not binding when we
 want to assess the impact of experimentation on subsequent adoption.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Farmers that received trial packs and farmers may lead to problems when
 control farmers do not get this, or when during follow-up interventions
 that do not involve trial packs are organized.
 Probably we will need to implement the intervention at the village level
 and match treatment and control villages.
 In one village, we could select 10 households to get the trial packs and
 these will then be compared to 10 households in a control village (close
 to the treatment village).
 In the next stage, results from the treatment village can be used 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Questions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Timing: can we use money for fieldwork that was reserved for 2022 in 2023?
 Because as it looks, we will do the baseline only in 2023.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
btprint "btPrintCited"
bibfiles "MIPPI_PAP"
options "IFPRI_Style"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
